#summary Zipf's Law and GeneRIF

= Zipf's Law =


== Introduction == 

In a short sentence, Zif's law states that in a corpus of natural language, the frequency of any word is approximately inversely proportional to its rank sorted in frequency order. This way, the most frequent word will occur roughly proportional to twice as often as the second most frequent word, 

This is useful to how much of geneRIF's database is covered by the n-first genes.

=== What to check? ===
As asked by Dr. Simon:

 "By querying the database, you can get the following table:
  geneID, totalNumPub, rankTNP
 Then, by plotting column 2 against column 3 on a log-log scale, you can see if it is an 1/f kind of curve."


== Procedures == 

Only human genes (taxID = 9606) were focused. 

Firstly sqlite3 was opened pointing the output to the file rule.txt, like this:

{{{
[baggio@localhost soc]$ sqlite3 gene.db > rule.txt
}}}

Then the separator was changed to space by typing:
{{{
sqlite> .separator ' '
}}}

The most popular human ggenes were retrieved through the following query:
{{{
sqlite> select geneID, count(*) as number from generif group by geneID having taxID = 9606 order by number DESC;
}}}

Which yielded this result:
|| *geneID* || *number of times it was cited* ||
||7157||1353||
||7124||808||
||7422||662||
||7040||526||
||5743|| 517||
||3569|| 481||
||1956|| 469||
||2099|| 433||
||4790|| 420||
||3576|| 366||
||1029|| 364||
||...|| ...||

In [http://www.octave.org/ octave] the data was imported and plotted like this:
{{{
A = load rule.txt
B = A(:,2);
loglog(B,"+;geneRIF;");
hold
size(B)
ans =
   9984      1
J = [1:1:9984];
W = 1353./J;
loglog(W,";~1/x;");
H = 1353./J.^(0.5);
loglog(H,";~1/x^.5;");
xlabel ("Rank");
ylabel ("Frequency");
}}}

Two curves were also plotted in order to watch whether geneRIF's frequencies were some kind of 1/f curve or something different. 

== Results == 

The results can be seen here:

[http://bp0.blogger.com/_6gCAzd7d_bQ/Rlz17LfOgVI/AAAAAAAAAAg/LlbYR7ZAeEQ/s1600-h/Zipf.jpg Zipf's Law Plotted Results]

== Conclusions == 

As it can be seen, additional curves were plotted, which compare geneRIFs with 1/x and 1/sqrt(x). It is clear that geneRIFs have a linear relation (in a log log scale), but it does not seem to be a 1/f kind of curve. GeneRifs seem to be roughly inversely proportional to the square root of the rank.
So, the frequency of the 2nd most popular gene is about 1/sqrt(2) the number of the most popular - which makes sense, because 808 ~= 1353/sqrt(2) = 956, and not 1353/2 = 676.5.

Quoting Dr. Simon: 
 "The importance of the Zipf's distribution is that only the top genes (kind of) matter. You can try this: take only the top 1000 genes (just about 10% of the total of 10,000 genes) and see what percentage of GeneRIFs it covers. (I guess it is very well above 10%!)"

Indeed it occurs as it is shown in CoverageTests.